---
layout: post
title: "Miniflux"
summary: "I test out the Miniflux feed reader and set it up on my server"
---

The past few years, I have been reading RSS feeds in the [Reeder](https://reederapp.com/) app[^1] on my iPhone and [Feedbin](https://feedbin.com/) on the web and as a backend for Reeder. 

Feedbin is a great RSS reader, but honestly I'm mostly using it as a backend store, and while paying $5 a month really isn't much, I still kind of got curious about exploring altenatives. I mean, it should be a simple thing and I have this nice DigitalOcean server and all that I could host stuff on, right. Also I sometimes fantasize about maybe some day writing my own feed reader app.  There have been a couple of false starts on that before. Self-hosting feels like a fun step in the right direction. 

After browsing around a bit, [Miniflux](https://miniflux.app/) caught my eye. The minimalism speaks to me, the navigation and UI makes perfect sense and the set a features it does include – like embedded the full web page for sites that do not include full text in the feed, and doing various transforms – seems spot on. And as I understand, it could also be used as a backend for Reeder using the Google Reader API. 

I tried it out locally on my macOS using [docker compose](https://miniflux.app/docs/dacker.html#docker-compose), imported some OPML from Feedbin, and... I absolutely love it. Let's get this running on skagedal.tech.

## Requirements

Looking at the [requirements](https://miniflux.app/docs/requirements.html) page, I should be all set. I run PostgreSQL 14.9 and, while that should be [updated](/posts/2023-01-19-updating-ubuntu), it's more than enough. I set up the database according to the [instructions](https://miniflux.app/docs/database.html). I was a little bit confused about this HSTORE extension, but if I understand correctly, just running the 'create extension hstore' command as a postgres superuser should do the job. (It did.)

## Installing the application

I debated a short while with myself whether I should run it under Docker. I have been thinking that this could be a nice approach to manage things as I add more software running on this machine. (Just plain Docker though, I have no interest right now in setting up a Kubernetes cluster or anything like that.) But it's also fun to do some good old Linux administration. I used Debian and later Ubuntu for many years on my personal computer before I switched to macOS. Installing stuff with `apt` gives me a nice nostalgic feeling. So let's continue with that and follow the [Debian](https://miniflux.app/docs/debian.html) installation instructions.

Installing it went smoothly. I was a confused for a while about the instructions to run things like `miniflux -migrate` and `miniflux -createadmin`. It just kept sayying that it could not connect to the database, and that the default values for DATABASE_URL was used.

```shell
$ miniflux -migrate
level=INFO msg="The default value for DATABASE_URL is used"
pq: password authentication failed for user "postgres"
```

But I had set the `DATABASE_URL` in the file `/etc/miniflux.conf`, just as instructed! Why didn't it pick it up? 

After a while, I realized what was going on. The file `/etc/miniflux.conf` file is what systemd uses to set environment variables for the miniflux service it manages. It's set up [like this](https://github.com/miniflux/v2/blob/main/packaging/systemd/miniflux.service#L19). Just running `miniflux` on its own doesn't apply that configuration. But it does happen to have a way to read the same configuration file format as a systemd EnvironmentFile, by specifying it using `miniflux -c /etc/miniflux.conf`. That documentation could perhaps be improved. 

Anyway, now it's running and I can `curl localhost:8080` to get the front page of miniflux from my host computer! 

## Connecting through a tunnel

Now, I need to expose this to the Internet so I can connect to it. Before I do that though, I'd like to play a little bit more, really make sure things are working and set up my account a bit and so on. I start a tunnel with from my Macbook:

```shell
$ ssh -NL 1234:localhost:8080 simon@skagedal.tech
```

And then I can open any old browser on my machine and connect to localhost:1234, and there I have the miniflux UI. Very cool. 

## Exposing to the Internet

Last time I set up a site on this server, I went through the work of [setting up a wildcard certificate](/posts/2023-02-13-deploying-normal-score-converter). That's nice, saves me some time! So now I just need to add another `nginx` site set up with a reverse proxy, similarly to how I did with [my habit tracker](/posts/2023-01-25-habit-tracker-exposing-it). 

Now I have my self-hosted Miniflux at [miniflux.skagedal.tech](https://miniflux.skagedal.tech) (sorry, you can't play) and can log in with my account and import all the subscriptions from Feedbin with an OPML export.

The crucial final test was, of course, whether I could now use this as the backed for Reeder. And, yup, a few more clicks to expose a Google Reader API and it was good to go. 

Feedbin was classy 'til the end, by the way. The offboarding experience was a super simple few clicks to close down the account, and then it sent me an e-mail with the final export of subscriptions. Kudos. 

[^1]: I'm still on Reeder 4 though, I think. 